---
date: '2015-03-20T13:28:56+01:00'
term: close-up
title: Close-Up
---

A close-up is a shot in which a person's face fills most of the
screen, although the term can also refer to any shot that appears to
have been taken at close range (or through a telephoto lens), and in
which an object appears relatively large and in detail.

<!--more-->

### Early Development

In the early days of cinema, close-ups were considered difficult for
audiences to adjust to. In films such as The Great Train Robbery
(1903), which famously features an early close-up shot of a bandit
pointing his gun at the audience, exhibitors were supplied with the
shot separately, and could decide whether to attach it to the
beginning or the end of the film, for special effect.

{{< embed_clip "Final Shot" >}}

### D.W. Griffith

D. W. Griffith is acknowledged as an early master of the integration
of the close-up into the filmed story. In Musketeers of Pig Alley
(1912), shot on location on New York's Lower East Side, a menacing
Elmer Booth enters the frame and advances toward the camera, his face
enlarged into a particularly effective close-up.

{{< embed_clip "Pig Alley" >}}

In the 1910s, as the camera drew ever closer to the actors, the idea
of film dramas as a kind of recorded theatrical experience began to
evolve into the idea of cinema proper, and the proximity of the camera
had an enormous impact on the differentiation of acting styles in the
cinema from those of the theater. Compare the subtlety of Lillian
Gish's stunning close-up in The Mothering Heart (1913) to her earlier
performance in The Lonely Villa (1909).

{{< embed_clip "Trapped in the Villa" >}}

{{< embed_clip "Broken Heart" >}}

### Continued Development

The close-up ushered in new ideas about the possible representation of
interior mental states, and was used as a syntactical element to
introduce flashbacks (as a kind of subjective memory), dreams,
hallucinations, and, perhaps most important for the development of
mainstream cinema language, point-of-view shots, in which the audience
is invited to follow the eye-line of a character's gaze from one shot
to the next. Many film theorists, such as Bela Balasz, have studied in
detail the representational power of the close-up as an essential
element of the cinema's almost supernatural ability to cut through
usual modes of perception. Carl Theodor Dreyer's The Passion of Joan
of Arc (1928) was shot almost entirely in close-up, prompting critics
like Balasz to describe it as a kind of "documentary of the soul," in
which the tools of photographic realism are used precisely to
transcend normal modes of "realistic" representation.

{{< embed_clip "Recantation" >}}

Others, such as Sergei Eisenstein and the Russian Formalists, have
argued that even close-ups have no inherent meanings, but are
predominantly conditioned by the shots that precede and follow
them. The famous "Kuleshov Experiment," in which the same close-up of
an actor's face was followed by different images, changed the meaning
of the actor's expression.  Rather than being a window onto the soul,
the face in close up, for Eisenstein, to the extent it conveyed any
immediate meaning, did so as a token or "type."