---
date: '2015-03-20T13:29:04+01:00'
term: sound
title: Sound
---

Sound is the audio portion of a film. <!--more-->This includes
[dialogue](../dialogue/), [music](../music/), and effects.

### Early Sound

There were attempts to add sound to film at the very beginning of
cinema. The earliest surviving sound film has been identified as
Dickson Experimental Sound Film. Produced by the Edison Manufacturing
Company sometime between 1894 and 1895, the film is apparently a test
for the "kineto-phonograph" (also called the
"phono-kinetograph"). However, the technology--which involved the
synchronization of image and sound by a mechanical belt--was not
commercially viable.

{{< embed_clip "Dickson Experimental Sound Film" >}}

There were experiments with sound in the early twentieth century.
Gaumont, for instance, experimented with synchronizing sound films
with his invention the Chronophone.

Silent films shown in movie palaces would have orchestral
accompaniment, and those screened in smaller theaters would use a
piano. Other common methods of adding sound to silent cinema involved
placing people or objects behind the screen, to make noises at
specific moments.

### The Modern Sound Era

The birth of the "modern" sound era is traced to 1927, with the
release of the Warner Bros. film The Jazz Singer. In this film, only
the musical numbers have a recorded soundtrack; the dialogue sequences
use the conventional method of films of the period, subtitles. The
technology that was employed to add sound to The Jazz Singer,
photographing sound directly onto film, was in fact patented by 1900,
so it took almost thirty years before this technology was implemented
commercially.

{{< embed_clip "The Big Chance" >}}

The earliest sound cameras, in the 1920s and '30s, were virtually
immobile because they had to remain in soundproof booths while
filming. Until filmmakers learned to control the noise of the camera,
advances in camera movement were briefly slowed. On the other hand,
sound added additional dimensions to film, such as spoken
dialogue. Comedies and gangster films were two early examples of
genres in which the richness of spoken dialogue was clear.

{{< embed_clip "Firefly and Teasdale" >}}

### Technical Advancements and Aesthetic Innovations

Sound technology wouldn't advance significantly until the 1950s, with
the advent of magnetic tape as the principal means of recording
sound. Stereophonic sound, which used magnetic tracks and multiple
speakers, increased the appeal of wide-screen cinema.

During this period, filmmakers continued to experiment with the
aesthetic potential of sound in film. Some interesting examples occur
in the films of Jacques Tati, Robert Altman, and Wim Wenders.

Combining sound with the visual aspects of a shot--such as depth of
field--Jacques Tati draws our attention to the background of a scene
while actions occur in the foreground. We see an example of playing
sounds and visuals against one another in Tati's Mr. Hulot's Holiday.

{{< embed_clip "Ping Pong Game" >}}

Robert Altman models his films on a multi-track recording technology
commonly used in the music industry. This often creates in his films a
free-for-all of overlapping dialogue and simultaneous speech.

The use of sound to enter a character's mind is another example of the
aesthetic possibilities of sound and cinema. In Wim Wenders's Wings of
Desire, as a camera tracks along past people in a library we hear
their thoughts.

{{< embed_clip "Angels in the Library" >}}

### Recent Technical Advancements

More recent developments in technical sound include Dolby, which
reduces background noise, and THX, which allowed sound systems in
theaters to have the full range of Dolby stereophonic sound by using
right, left, and center speakers, along with a subwoofer and 22
surround speakers.

Digital sound, another advancement, converts sound into a series of
binary numbers, placing them in a computer's memory without
deterioration.