---
date: '2015-03-20T13:29:04+01:00'
term: split-screen
title: Split Screen
termsummary: ''
relatedterms:
- Wipe
---

Split screen is the combination of two or more scenes films separately
which appear in the same frame.

<!--more-->

Religious art exploited the idea of multiple images for centuries. One
prominent example is the Merode Altarpiece, from the mid-fifteenth
century.

<div class="widget-image">
    <img src="/img/assets/campin_merode.jpg" />
    <div class="caption">Merode Altarpiece (Robert Campin, 1425-30) Met museum</div>
</div>

Triptych paintings featured a main central image, flanked on both
sides by two or more generally related images. The concept of
triptychs was one of the many painterly conventions co-opted by cinema
from its inception.

Ephraim Katz has written that Raoul Gromoin-Sanson patented what was
called a Cineorama multi-screen system in 1897. The first public
presentation of the system, at the 1900 World Exposition in Paris,
featured ten synchronized projectors simultaneously showing ten images
on a circular panoramic screen. The attraction was so sensational that
the police were forced to close it after just three performances, in
the interest of crowd control and public safety.

Despite the sensation, the system failed to become a standard within
the cost-conscious popular film industry. But the French director Abel
Gance wanted an epic visual quality for the making of his national
paean, Napoleon, in 1927. It was decades before wide-screen lenses
would become generally available, so Gance recalled
[Cinerama](../cinerama/) and used three projectors and three screens
in a system he called Polyvision. At times, Gance used the system to
create a triptych effect of three visually disconnected images. At
other times, he used the three-screen technique to create one wide and
cohesive image.

{{< embed_clip "March of NapolÃ©on" >}}

{{< embed_clip "Massing the Troops" >}}

Napoleon accomplished Gance's vision, but, once again, the
multi-projector concept was shunted aside as impractical. Still,
filmmakers continued to experiment with the idea of splitting the
screen, often to amusing effect. A related example of split screen is
the [wipe](../wipe/).

Split screen made one notable appearance in the 1950s. The Production
Code had been limiting sexual content for decades, so the director
Michael Gordon pushed the envelope in Pillow Talk (1959). His comic
use of split screen allowed his film to stay true to the letter of the
Code, while also suggesting that the stars of the film, Rock Hudson
and Doris Day, were breaking taboos by apparently sharing a bed and a
bathtub.

{{< embed_clip "Bathtub Talk" >}}

The Op Art movement of the 1960s reinvigorated the use of split
screen. The young Brian DePalma was quick to play with the device. In
Sisters (1973), he used multiple images to simultaneously involve and
disorient the viewer. He advanced this notion during the climactic
sequence in Carrie (1976).

{{< embed_clip "Murder" >}}

As Op Art passed into history, split screen again fell out of
favor. But it still has its uses. Gus Van Sant's To Die For (1995)
makes a darkly comic statement about the mass-media culture and the
hunger for television fame. The closing image involves a shot of the
least likely achiever of such fame. Van Sant's use of split screen
efficiently suggests that becoming a media star is largely a matter of
whimsical fate.

{{< embed_clip "Famous" >}}

Mike Figgis's Timecode (2000) offered a new approach to the use of
split screen, as the film was shot digitally and screened in four
concurrent ninety-minute takes.

{{< embed_clip "Earthquake" >}}